# Domain of Interest: **Mental Health**

Shiny App url: https://tsenga11.shinyapps.io/Mental_Health_Analysis_App/

## Why are you interested in this field/domain?
Mental health is a huge topic that has consistently been overlooked despite how widespread the issue of mental health disorders is. There is also a lack of treatment and information for many mental health disorders in a multitude of countries. People across different cultures, languages, socioeconomic classes and ages but not enough individuals talk about it. Therefore, we wanted to address this stigmatized topic and analyze the data for any new insight into
**mental health issues.**

## Related Examples of Data Driven Projects
1. **Our World in Data**: https://ourworldindata.org/mental-health
    - This is a report from _Our World in Data_, an organization based at the University of Oxford to use research and data to
      help solve some of the world's problems. They compiled a large report presenting estimates of mental health disorder
      prevalence and associated disease burden and produced a lot of interesting interactive visualizations.
2. **Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation**: https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-compare/
    - This is a large group of visualizations from the _Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation_, a population health
      research center at UW Medicine. It allows us to compare different factors and the prevalence of various diseases and
      disorders, including mental health disorders. There are a lot of different visualization options, including line plots,
      bar graphs, tree maps, and geospatial maps.
3. **U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs**: https://mihiriyer.shinyapps.io/MentalHealth/
    - This is an R Shiny app that visualizes mental health data from the U.S. Departments of Veterans Affairs and their
      Northeast Program Evaluation Center. They released statistics in April 2016 for fiscal year 2015 on "the
      prevalence, mental health utilization, non-mental health utilization, mental health workload, and psychological
      testing of Veterans with a possible or confirmed diagnosis of mental illness." The app allows the user to see different
      graphs and specific parts of the data.

## What data-driven questions do you hope to answer about this domain?
1. Are different mental health issues more prevalent in certain areas in the United States than others?
2. Are there any differences in the quality of mental health care and treatment facilities between states?
3. How many of the patients seeking treatment for depression were treated in each mental health treatment facility across each state?


### Where did you download the data (e.g., a web URL)?
1. **N-MHSS-2018**: https://www.datafiles.samhsa.gov/study-dataset/national-mental-health-services-survey-2018-n-mhss-2018-ds0001-nid18767
  - This data set was downloaded from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Archive.
2. **Connecticut Mental Health Survey** (2015-2016): http://data.ctdata.org/visualization/mental-health?v=table&f={%22Variable%22:%20%22Mental%20Health%22,%20%22Region%22:%20%22Connecticut%22,%20%22Measure%20Type%22:%20%22Percent%22,%20%22Year%22:%20%222015-2016%22}
  - This data set was downloaded from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Archive.
3. **National Veteran Health Equity Report** (2019): https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/national-veteran-health-equity-report-fy13
  - This data set was downloaded from the national database, data.gov.

### How was the data collected or generated?
1. The statistics of the **N-MHSS-2018** data set was collected by the National Mental Health Services Survey of 2018. All of this data was collected from all known mental health treatment services across the United States. Statistics on the mental health services were gathered on the location, characteristics and utilization of providers for mental health in America via mail, telephone and online.
2. The data from the **Connecticut Mental Health** Survey was collected by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) as part of the National Survey on Drug Use and Health. The statistics collected from the survey is conducted on a representative sample of U.S. civilian, non-institutionalized people aged 12 and up across the United States.
3. The statistics of the **National Veteran Health Equity Report** was collected by the Veterans Health Affairs Office of Health Equity and pulled from the VA JSON Harvest Source Record. The data was generated by monitoring and evaluating veterans who were considered in vulnerable condition on a holistic basis of socio-demographics and rates of diagnosed health conditions.

### How many observations (rows) are in your data?
1. The statistics of the N-MHSS-2018 data set has **11682** rows.
2. The dataset from the Connecticut Mental Health Survey has **672** rows.
3. The statistics of the National Veteran Health Equity Report has **1364** rows.

### How many features (columns) are in the data?
1. The statistics of the N-MHSS-2018 data set has **284** columns.
2. The dataset from the Connecticut Mental Health Survey has **7** columns.
3. The statistics of the National Veteran Health Equity Report has **33** columns.

### What questions (from above) can be answered using the data in this dataset?
Some questions we believe could be answered by the data sets are below:
1. For the data from the **N-MHSS-2018** data set, we can answer several questions, such as:
  - Which facilities provide housing for mental health patients?
  - Which facilities focus on certain categories of mental health issues?
  - Which states have the most resources in terms of facilities and
    treatment options?


2. For the data from the **Connecticut Mental Health** Survey data set, we can answer several questions, such as:
  - Which age-range had the most cases of mental health issues per year?
  - What mental health issue did the highest percentage of people have?
  - What were the percentage of people that had what they considered
    serious mental illness?


3. For the data from the **National Veteran Health Equity Report** data set, we can answer several questions, such as:
  - Which category of diagnosis has the greatest number of vulnerable veterans?
  - How many individuals aged 18 to 44 were Asian? What about other ethnicities?
  - What number of diagnosed veterans visited the treatment facilities for mental health issues or substance use disorders?
